---
title: "Modern static site generation"
draft: true
path: "/moderl-static-site-generation"
---

Static site generation is just another form of caching your content. Think of when you are caching the home page of a Wordpress site and you are serving the cached content on every visitor. The thing though is that in many cases, there is no need for a system like Wordpress at all. My personal site contains a list of blog posts and static information  about me that I am updating it once in a while. Commends are being hosted on Disquss. There is absolutely no need for a system like Wordpress or even a system like Ghost which I have  been using for the last 3 years. While it served me well all this time, I really got tired of updating it, ssh-ing to the server, doing migrations and doing other ops required by such a stack. While there are also options of hosting in the cloud, pretty much the will be paid and fairly enough, they deserve it for doing such a job.

But really, do I need a system like that? Not at all. I would also argue that not even an architecture with Wordpress involved needs a caching mechanism and would be pretty much benefit from static site generation and we will discuss that later below.

## Static site generation as we know them

Jekyll, Hexo, Hugo. They do one thing and they do it extremely well. I've build tone of sites using Jekyll hosted either on GitHub either somewhere else. They all work pretty much the same way

* You describe your content in some common templating language (JADE, Handlebars, etc)
* While in development, start a local web server and add "watchers" that will listen 
for content changes and re-render the site
* Finally, you render the whole site in static HTML and deploy. The generator will combine your 
files and produce a well formed HTML content.

For client side functionality, you have to keep the client side logic separated from the backend. Much like in an architecture where Wordpress is involved. So, pretty much nothing is changed. Literally, the difference from having a cached version of wordpress and content generated with Jekyll is none.

## Enter the new world order

React.js! Aw yeah! We've heard about it! It's dominating the Web, but for a reason really. There are really so many reasons React.js have gained such a hype. Many of the techniques we will discuss here can be easily applied with other frameworks and libraries but Reacts can play so nicely with them.

There is this function called Server Side Rendering where you can produce static HTML content directly from a tree of React.js components. That content will still contains the required React.js specific anotations needed so when the same tree will be loaded on the client, on top of the previously produced content, will know exactly what it has to render and what not to render. From there, the client side logic can take the lead. So, once the user visits a site, the server will directly respond with the static HTML. Once it's loaded in the user's browser and the user navigates in another route, 
the client side logic will respond and will render the new page, instead of contacting the server again. That's really a game changer.

So let's see the new list:

* Describe your content in React.js Components
* Write code on development like a boss (hot reloading, modularized code, webpack plugins, etc...)
* Use React.js SSR API to render your content

## Wait, what? Just like that?

Yeah, I know. I made it look so easy. It's really not. There is the need for a strong abstraction that will track your links across your components, parse content written in another format, like blog posts written in Markdown, generate code that will not bloat the client and will efficiently server the content to the user.

Thankfully, there are a few projects that took the initiative and they are doing a great job so far. At the time of reading this, this site will already be served by GitHub pages and the content you will see once you view the source it's been generated by Gatsby.js.

I have been following those projects for quite a few time now. Here's my list:

* Gatsby.js
* Phenomic
* nextein

At the time that I started following them, all of them were in a very early stage and none of them could generate my site's content the way I wanted and in the same way as my previous one, so I wouldn't lose paths and certain functionalities. I wanted to make the generated site, exactly like the old one in terms of the user experience. Once Gatsby.js hitted major version 1, I started using it and the result..., you are looking at it!

## What exactly am I looking at?

Take a look [here](https://github.com/kbariotis/kostasbariotis.com). 

